<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 7</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
    <h2 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span><span epub:type="subtitle">Lad-And-Girl Love</span></h2>
    <p>
      PAUL had been many times up to Willey Farm during the autumn. He was
      friends with the two youngest boys. Edgar the eldest, would not condescend
      at first. And Miriam also refused to be approached. She was afraid of
      being set at nought, as by her own brothers. The girl was romantic in her
      soul. Everywhere was a Walter Scott heroine being loved by men with
      helmets or with plumes in their caps. She herself was something of a
      princess turned into a swine-girl in her own imagination. And she was
      afraid lest this boy, who, nevertheless, looked something like a Walter
      Scott hero, who could paint and speak French, and knew what algebra meant,
      and who went by train to Nottingham every day, might consider her simply
      as the swine-girl, unable to perceive the princess beneath; so she held
      aloof.
    </p>
    <p>
      Her great companion was her mother. They were both brown-eyed, and
      inclined to be mystical, such women as treasure religion inside them,
      breathe it in their nostrils, and see the whole of life in a mist thereof.
      So to Miriam, Christ and God made one great figure, which she loved
      tremblingly and passionately when a tremendous sunset burned out the
      western sky, and Ediths, and Lucys, and Rowenas, Brian de Bois Guilberts,
      Rob Roys, and Guy Mannerings, rustled the sunny leaves in the morning, or
      sat in her bedroom aloft, alone, when it snowed. That was life to her. For
      the rest, she drudged in the house, which work she would not have minded
      had not her clean red floor been mucked up immediately by the trampling
      farm-boots of her brothers. She madly wanted her little brother of four to
      let her swathe him and stifle him in her love; she went to church
      reverently, with bowed head, and quivered in anguish from the vulgarity of
      the other choir-girls and from the common-sounding voice of the curate;
      she fought with her brothers, whom she considered brutal louts; and she
      held not her father in too high esteem because he did not carry any
      mystical ideals cherished in his heart, but only wanted to have as easy a
      time as he could, and his meals when he was ready for them.
    </p>
    <p>
      She hated her position as swine-girl. She wanted to be considered. She
      wanted to learn, thinking that if she could read, as Paul said he could
      read, &ldquo;Colomba&rdquo;, or the &ldquo;Voyage autour de ma Chambre&rdquo;, the world would
      have a different face for her and a deepened respect. She could not be
      princess by wealth or standing. So she was mad to have learning whereon to
      pride herself. For she was different from other folk, and must not be
      scooped up among the common fry. Learning was the only distinction to
      which she thought to aspire.
    </p>
    <p>
      Her beauty&mdash;that of a shy, wild, quiveringly sensitive thing&mdash;seemed
      nothing to her. Even her soul, so strong for rhapsody, was not enough. She
      must have something to reinforce her pride, because she felt different
      from other people. Paul she eyed rather wistfully. On the whole, she
      scorned the male sex. But here was a new specimen, quick, light, graceful,
      who could be gentle and who could be sad, and who was clever, and who knew
      a lot, and who had a death in the family. The boy&rsquo;s poor morsel of
      learning exalted him almost sky-high in her esteem. Yet she tried hard to
      scorn him, because he would not see in her the princess but only the
      swine-girl. And he scarcely observed her.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then he was so ill, and she felt he would be weak. Then she would be
      stronger than he. Then she could love him. If she could be mistress of him
      in his weakness, take care of him, if he could depend on her, if she
      could, as it were, have him in her arms, how she would love him!
    </p>
    <p>
      As soon as the skies brightened and plum-blossom was out, Paul drove off
      in the milkman&rsquo;s heavy float up to Willey Farm. Mr. Leivers shouted in a
      kindly fashion at the boy, then clicked to the horse as they climbed the
      hill slowly, in the freshness of the morning. White clouds went on their
      way, crowding to the back of the hills that were rousing in the
      springtime. The water of Nethermere lay below, very blue against the
      seared meadows and the thorn-trees.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was four and a half miles&rsquo; drive. Tiny buds on the hedges, vivid as
      copper-green, were opening into rosettes; and thrushes called, and
      blackbirds shrieked and scolded. It was a new, glamorous world.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miriam, peeping through the kitchen window, saw the horse walk through the
      big white gate into the farmyard that was backed by the oak-wood, still
      bare. Then a youth in a heavy overcoat climbed down. He put up his hands
      for the whip and the rug that the good-looking, ruddy farmer handed down
      to him.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miriam appeared in the doorway. She was nearly sixteen, very beautiful,
      with her warm colouring, her gravity, her eyes dilating suddenly like an
      ecstasy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I say,&rdquo; said Paul, turning shyly aside, &ldquo;your daffodils are nearly out.
      Isn&rsquo;t it early? But don&rsquo;t they look cold?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Cold!&rdquo; said Miriam, in her musical, caressing voice.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The green on their buds&mdash;&rdquo; and he faltered into silence timidly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let me take the rug,&rdquo; said Miriam over-gently.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can carry it,&rdquo; he answered, rather injured. But he yielded it to her.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then Mrs. Leivers appeared.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure you&rsquo;re tired and cold,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Let me take your coat. It IS
      heavy. You mustn&rsquo;t walk far in it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She helped him off with his coat. He was quite unused to such attention.
      She was almost smothered under its weight.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, mother,&rdquo; laughed the farmer as he passed through the kitchen,
      swinging the great milk-churns, &ldquo;you&rsquo;ve got almost more than you can
      manage there.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She beat up the sofa cushions for the youth.
    </p>
    <p>
      The kitchen was very small and irregular. The farm had been originally a
      labourer&rsquo;s cottage. And the furniture was old and battered. But Paul loved
      it&mdash;loved the sack-bag that formed the hearthrug, and the funny
      little corner under the stairs, and the small window deep in the corner,
      through which, bending a little, he could see the plum trees in the back
      garden and the lovely round hills beyond.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Won&rsquo;t you lie down?&rdquo; said Mrs. Leivers.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh no; I&rsquo;m not tired,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t it lovely coming out, don&rsquo;t you
      think? I saw a sloe-bush in blossom and a lot of celandines. I&rsquo;m glad it&rsquo;s
      sunny.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Can I give you anything to eat or to drink?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, thank you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How&rsquo;s your mother?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I think she&rsquo;s tired now. I think she&rsquo;s had too much to do. Perhaps in a
      little while she&rsquo;ll go to Skegness with me. Then she&rsquo;ll be able to rest. I
      s&rsquo;ll be glad if she can.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; replied Mrs. Leivers. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a wonder she isn&rsquo;t ill herself.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miriam was moving about preparing dinner. Paul watched everything that
      happened. His face was pale and thin, but his eyes were quick and bright
      with life as ever. He watched the strange, almost rhapsodic way in which
      the girl moved about, carrying a great stew-jar to the oven, or looking in
      the saucepan. The atmosphere was different from that of his own home,
      where everything seemed so ordinary. When Mr. Leivers called loudly
      outside to the horse, that was reaching over to feed on the rose-bushes in
      the garden, the girl started, looked round with dark eyes, as if something
      had come breaking in on her world. There was a sense of silence inside the
      house and out. Miriam seemed as in some dreamy tale, a maiden in bondage,
      her spirit dreaming in a land far away and magical. And her discoloured,
      old blue frock and her broken boots seemed only like the romantic rags of
      King Cophetua&rsquo;s beggar-maid.
    </p>
    <p>
      She suddenly became aware of his keen blue eyes upon her, taking her all
      in. Instantly her broken boots and her frayed old frock hurt her. She
      resented his seeing everything. Even he knew that her stocking was not
      pulled up. She went into the scullery, blushing deeply. And afterwards her
      hands trembled slightly at her work. She nearly dropped all she handled.
      When her inside dream was shaken, her body quivered with trepidation. She
      resented that he saw so much.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Leivers sat for some time talking to the boy, although she was needed
      at her work. She was too polite to leave him. Presently she excused
      herself and rose. After a while she looked into the tin saucepan.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh DEAR, Miriam,&rdquo; she cried, &ldquo;these potatoes have boiled dry!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miriam started as if she had been stung.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;HAVE they, mother?&rdquo; she cried.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I shouldn&rsquo;t care, Miriam,&rdquo; said the mother, &ldquo;if I hadn&rsquo;t trusted them to
      you.&rdquo; She peered into the pan.
    </p>
    <p>
      The girl stiffened as if from a blow. Her dark eyes dilated; she remained
      standing in the same spot.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; she answered, gripped tight in self-conscious shame, &ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure I
      looked at them five minutes since.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; said the mother, &ldquo;I know it&rsquo;s easily done.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They&rsquo;re not much burned,&rdquo; said Paul. &ldquo;It doesn&rsquo;t matter, does it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Leivers looked at the youth with her brown, hurt eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It wouldn&rsquo;t matter but for the boys,&rdquo; she said to him. &ldquo;Only Miriam knows
      what a trouble they make if the potatoes are &lsquo;caught&rsquo;.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then,&rdquo; thought Paul to himself, &ldquo;you shouldn&rsquo;t let them make a trouble.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      After a while Edgar came in. He wore leggings, and his boots were covered
      with earth. He was rather small, rather formal, for a farmer. He glanced
      at Paul, nodded to him distantly, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dinner ready?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nearly, Edgar,&rdquo; replied the mother apologetically.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m ready for mine,&rdquo; said the young man, taking up the newspaper and
      reading. Presently the rest of the family trooped in. Dinner was served.
      The meal went rather brutally. The over-gentleness and apologetic tone of
      the mother brought out all the brutality of manners in the sons. Edgar
      tasted the potatoes, moved his mouth quickly like a rabbit, looked
      indignantly at his mother, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;These potatoes are burnt, mother.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, Edgar. I forgot them for a minute. Perhaps you&rsquo;ll have bread if you
      can&rsquo;t eat them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Edgar looked in anger across at Miriam.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What was Miriam doing that she couldn&rsquo;t attend to them?&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miriam looked up. Her mouth opened, her dark eyes blazed and winced, but
      she said nothing. She swallowed her anger and her shame, bowing her dark
      head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure she was trying hard,&rdquo; said the mother.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She hasn&rsquo;t got sense even to boil the potatoes,&rdquo; said Edgar. &ldquo;What is she
      kept at home for?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;On&rsquo;y for eating everything that&rsquo;s left in th&rsquo; pantry,&rdquo; said Maurice.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They don&rsquo;t forget that potato-pie against our Miriam,&rdquo; laughed the
      father.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was utterly humiliated. The mother sat in silence, suffering, like
      some saint out of place at the brutal board.
    </p>
    <p>
      It puzzled Paul. He wondered vaguely why all this intense feeling went
      running because of a few burnt potatoes. The mother exalted everything&mdash;even
      a bit of housework&mdash;to the plane of a religious trust. The sons
      resented this; they felt themselves cut away underneath, and they answered
      with brutality and also with a sneering superciliousness.
    </p>
    <p>
      Paul was just opening out from childhood into manhood. This atmosphere,
      where everything took a religious value, came with a subtle fascination to
      him. There was something in the air. His own mother was logical. Here
      there was something different, something he loved, something that at times
      he hated.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miriam quarrelled with her brothers fiercely. Later in the afternoon, when
      they had gone away again, her mother said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You disappointed me at dinner-time, Miriam.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The girl dropped her head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They are such BRUTES!&rdquo; she suddenly cried, looking up with flashing eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But hadn&rsquo;t you promised not to answer them?&rdquo; said the mother. &ldquo;And I
      believed in you. I CAN&rsquo;T stand it when you wrangle.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But they&rsquo;re so hateful!&rdquo; cried Miriam, &ldquo;and&mdash;and LOW.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, dear. But how often have I asked you not to answer Edgar back? Can&rsquo;t
      you let him say what he likes?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But why should he say what he likes?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Aren&rsquo;t you strong enough to bear it, Miriam, if even for my sake? Are you
      so weak that you must wrangle with them?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mrs. Leivers stuck unflinchingly to this doctrine of &ldquo;the other cheek&rdquo;.
      She could not instil it at all into the boys. With the girls she succeeded
      better, and Miriam was the child of her heart. The boys loathed the other
      cheek when it was presented to them. Miriam was often sufficiently lofty
      to turn it. Then they spat on her and hated her. But she walked in her
      proud humility, living within herself.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was always this feeling of jangle and discord in the Leivers family.
      Although the boys resented so bitterly this eternal appeal to their deeper
      feelings of resignation and proud humility, yet it had its effect on them.
      They could not establish between themselves and an outsider just the
      ordinary human feeling and unexaggerated friendship; they were always
      restless for the something deeper. Ordinary folk seemed shallow to them,
      trivial and inconsiderable. And so they were unaccustomed, painfully
      uncouth in the simplest social intercourse, suffering, and yet insolent in
      their superiority. Then beneath was the yearning for the soul-intimacy to
      which they could not attain because they were too dumb, and every approach
      to close connection was blocked by their clumsy contempt of other people.
      They wanted genuine intimacy, but they could not get even normally near to
      anyone, because they scorned to take the first steps, they scorned the
      triviality which forms common human intercourse.
    </p>
    <p>
      Paul fell under Mrs. Leivers&rsquo;s spell. Everything had a religious and
      intensified meaning when he was with her. His soul, hurt, highly
      developed, sought her as if for nourishment. Together they seemed to sift
      the vital fact from an experience.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miriam was her mother&rsquo;s daughter. In the sunshine of the afternoon mother
      and daughter went down the fields with him. They looked for nests. There
      was a jenny wren&rsquo;s in the hedge by the orchard.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I DO want you to see this,&rdquo; said Mrs. Leivers.
    </p>
    <p>
      He crouched down and carefully put his finger through the thorns into the
      round door of the nest.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s almost as if you were feeling inside the live body of the bird,&rdquo; he
      said, &ldquo;it&rsquo;s so warm. They say a bird makes its nest round like a cup with
      pressing its breast on it. Then how did it make the ceiling round, I
      wonder?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The nest seemed to start into life for the two women. After that, Miriam
      came to see it every day. It seemed so close to her. Again, going down the
      hedgeside with the girl, he noticed the celandines, scalloped splashes of
      gold, on the side of the ditch.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I like them,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;when their petals go flat back with the sunshine.
      They seemed to be pressing themselves at the sun.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And then the celandines ever after drew her with a little spell.
      Anthropomorphic as she was, she stimulated him into appreciating things
      thus, and then they lived for her. She seemed to need things kindling in
      her imagination or in her soul before she felt she had them. And she was
      cut off from ordinary life by her religious intensity which made the world
      for her either a nunnery garden or a paradise, where sin and knowledge
      were not, or else an ugly, cruel thing.
    </p>
    <p>
      So it was in this atmosphere of subtle intimacy, this meeting in their
      common feeling for something in Nature, that their love started.
    </p>
    <p>
      Personally, he was a long time before he realized her. For ten months he
      had to stay at home after his illness. For a while he went to Skegness
      with his mother, and was perfectly happy. But even from the seaside he
      wrote long letters to Mrs. Leivers about the shore and the sea. And he
      brought back his beloved sketches of the flat Lincoln coast, anxious for
      them to see. Almost they would interest the Leivers more than they
      interested his mother. It was not his art Mrs. Morel cared about; it was
      himself and his achievement. But Mrs. Leivers and her children were almost
      his disciples. They kindled him and made him glow to his work, whereas his
      mother&rsquo;s influence was to make him quietly determined, patient, dogged,
      unwearied.
    </p>
    <p>
      He soon was friends with the boys, whose rudeness was only superficial.
      They had all, when they could trust themselves, a strange gentleness and
      lovableness.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Will you come with me on to the fallow?&rdquo; asked Edgar, rather
      hesitatingly.
    </p>
    <p>
      Paul went joyfully, and spent the afternoon helping to hoe or to single
      turnips with his friend. He used to lie with the three brothers in the hay
      piled up in the barn and tell them about Nottingham and about Jordan&rsquo;s. In
      return, they taught him to milk, and let him do little jobs&mdash;chopping
      hay or pulping turnips&mdash;just as much as he liked. At midsummer he
      worked all through hay-harvest with them, and then he loved them. The
      family was so cut off from the world actually. They seemed, somehow, like
      &ldquo;<i>les derniers fils d&rsquo;une race epuisee</i>&rdquo;. Though the lads were strong
      and healthy, yet they had all that over-sensitiveness and hanging-back
      which made them so lonely, yet also such close, delicate friends once
      their intimacy was won. Paul loved them dearly, and they him.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miriam came later. But he had come into her life before she made any mark
      on his. One dull afternoon, when the men were on the land and the rest at
      school, only Miriam and her mother at home, the girl said to him, after
      having hesitated for some time:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Have you seen the swing?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; he answered. &ldquo;Where?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In the cowshed,&rdquo; she replied.
    </p>
    <p>
      She always hesitated to offer or to show him anything. Men have such
      different standards of worth from women, and her dear things&mdash;the
      valuable things to her&mdash;her brothers had so often mocked or flouted.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come on, then,&rdquo; he replied, jumping up.
    </p>
    <p>
      There were two cowsheds, one on either side of the barn. In the lower,
      darker shed there was standing for four cows. Hens flew scolding over the
      manger-wall as the youth and girl went forward for the great thick rope
      which hung from the beam in the darkness overhead, and was pushed back
      over a peg in the wall.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s something like a rope!&rdquo; he exclaimed appreciatively; and he sat down
      on it, anxious to try it. Then immediately he rose.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come on, then, and have first go,&rdquo; he said to the girl.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;See,&rdquo; she answered, going into the barn, &ldquo;we put some bags on the seat&rdquo;;
      and she made the swing comfortable for him. That gave her pleasure. He
      held the rope.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come on, then,&rdquo; he said to her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I won&rsquo;t go first,&rdquo; she answered.
    </p>
    <p>
      She stood aside in her still, aloof fashion.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You go,&rdquo; she pleaded.
    </p>
    <p>
      Almost for the first time in her life she had the pleasure of giving up to
      a man, of spoiling him. Paul looked at her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All right,&rdquo; he said, sitting down. &ldquo;Mind out!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He set off with a spring, and in a moment was flying through the air,
      almost out of the door of the shed, the upper half of which was open,
      showing outside the drizzling rain, the filthy yard, the cattle standing
      disconsolate against the black cartshed, and at the back of all the
      grey-green wall of the wood. She stood below in her crimson tam-o&rsquo;-shanter
      and watched. He looked down at her, and she saw his blue eyes sparkling.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a treat of a swing,&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He was swinging through the air, every bit of him swinging, like a bird
      that swoops for joy of movement. And he looked down at her. Her crimson
      cap hung over her dark curls, her beautiful warm face, so still in a kind
      of brooding, was lifted towards him. It was dark and rather cold in the
      shed. Suddenly a swallow came down from the high roof and darted out of
      the door.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t know a bird was watching,&rdquo; he called.
    </p>
    <p>
      He swung negligently. She could feel him falling and lifting through the
      air, as if he were lying on some force.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now I&rsquo;ll die,&rdquo; he said, in a detached, dreamy voice, as though he were
      the dying motion of the swing. She watched him, fascinated. Suddenly he
      put on the brake and jumped out.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve had a long turn,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;But it&rsquo;s a treat of a swing&mdash;it&rsquo;s a
      real treat of a swing!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miriam was amused that he took a swing so seriously and felt so warmly
      over it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No; you go on,&rdquo; she said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, don&rsquo;t you want one?&rdquo; he asked, astonished.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, not much. I&rsquo;ll have just a little.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She sat down, whilst he kept the bags in place for her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s so ripping!&rdquo; he said, setting her in motion. &ldquo;Keep your heels up, or
      they&rsquo;ll bang the manger wall.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She felt the accuracy with which he caught her, exactly at the right
      moment, and the exactly proportionate strength of his thrust, and she was
      afraid. Down to her bowels went the hot wave of fear. She was in his
      hands. Again, firm and inevitable came the thrust at the right moment. She
      gripped the rope, almost swooning.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ha!&rdquo; she laughed in fear. &ldquo;No higher!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But you&rsquo;re not a BIT high,&rdquo; he remonstrated.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But no higher.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He heard the fear in her voice, and desisted. Her heart melted in hot pain
      when the moment came for him to thrust her forward again. But he left her
      alone. She began to breathe.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Won&rsquo;t you really go any farther?&rdquo; he asked. &ldquo;Should I keep you there?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No; let me go by myself,&rdquo; she answered.
    </p>
    <p>
      He moved aside and watched her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, you&rsquo;re scarcely moving,&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      She laughed slightly with shame, and in a moment got down.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They say if you can swing you won&rsquo;t be sea-sick,&rdquo; he said, as he mounted
      again. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t believe I should ever be sea-sick.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Away he went. There was something fascinating to her in him. For the
      moment he was nothing but a piece of swinging stuff; not a particle of him
      that did not swing. She could never lose herself so, nor could her
      brothers. It roused a warmth in her. It was almost as if he were a flame
      that had lit a warmth in her whilst he swung in the middle air.
    </p>
    <p>
      And gradually the intimacy with the family concentrated for Paul on three
      persons&mdash;the mother, Edgar, and Miriam. To the mother he went for
      that sympathy and that appeal which seemed to draw him out. Edgar was his
      very close friend. And to Miriam he more or less condescended, because she
      seemed so humble.
    </p>
    <p>
      But the girl gradually sought him out. If he brought up his sketch-book,
      it was she who pondered longest over the last picture. Then she would look
      up at him. Suddenly, her dark eyes alight like water that shakes with a
      stream of gold in the dark, she would ask:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why do I like this so?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Always something in his breast shrank from these close, intimate, dazzled
      looks of hers.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why DO you?&rdquo; he asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know. It seems so true.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s because&mdash;it&rsquo;s because there is scarcely any shadow in it; it&rsquo;s
      more shimmery, as if I&rsquo;d painted the shimmering protoplasm in the leaves
      and everywhere, and not the stiffness of the shape. That seems dead to me.
      Only this shimmeriness is the real living. The shape is a dead crust. The
      shimmer is inside really.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And she, with her little finger in her mouth, would ponder these sayings.
      They gave her a feeling of life again, and vivified things which had meant
      nothing to her. She managed to find some meaning in his struggling,
      abstract speeches. And they were the medium through which she came
      distinctly at her beloved objects.
    </p>
    <p>
      Another day she sat at sunset whilst he was painting some pine-trees which
      caught the red glare from the west. He had been quiet.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There you are!&rdquo; he said suddenly. &ldquo;I wanted that. Now, look at them and
      tell me, are they pine trunks or are they red coals, standing-up pieces of
      fire in that darkness? There&rsquo;s God&rsquo;s burning bush for you, that burned not
      away.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miriam looked, and was frightened. But the pine trunks were wonderful to
      her, and distinct. He packed his box and rose. Suddenly he looked at her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why are you always sad?&rdquo; he asked her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sad!&rdquo; she exclaimed, looking up at him with startled, wonderful brown
      eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; he replied. &ldquo;You are always sad.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am not&mdash;oh, not a bit!&rdquo; she cried.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But even your joy is like a flame coming off of sadness,&rdquo; he persisted.
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re never jolly, or even just all right.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; she pondered. &ldquo;I wonder&mdash;why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because you&rsquo;re not; because you&rsquo;re different inside, like a pine-tree,
      and then you flare up; but you&rsquo;re not just like an ordinary tree, with
      fidgety leaves and jolly&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He got tangled up in his own speech; but she brooded on it, and he had a
      strange, roused sensation, as if his feelings were new. She got so near
      him. It was a strange stimulant.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then sometimes he hated her. Her youngest brother was only five. He was a
      frail lad, with immense brown eyes in his quaint fragile face&mdash;one of
      Reynolds&rsquo;s &ldquo;Choir of Angels&rdquo;, with a touch of elf. Often Miriam kneeled to
      the child and drew him to her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Eh, my Hubert!&rdquo; she sang, in a voice heavy and surcharged with love. &ldquo;Eh,
      my Hubert!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And, folding him in her arms, she swayed slightly from side to side with
      love, her face half lifted, her eyes half closed, her voice drenched with
      love.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t!&rdquo; said the child, uneasy&mdash;&ldquo;don&rsquo;t, Miriam!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes; you love me, don&rsquo;t you?&rdquo; she murmured deep in her throat, almost as
      if she were in a trance, and swaying also as if she were swooned in an
      ecstasy of love.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t!&rdquo; repeated the child, a frown on his clear brow.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You love me, don&rsquo;t you?&rdquo; she murmured.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What do you make such a FUSS for?&rdquo; cried Paul, all in suffering because
      of her extreme emotion. &ldquo;Why can&rsquo;t you be ordinary with him?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She let the child go, and rose, and said nothing. Her intensity, which
      would leave no emotion on a normal plane, irritated the youth into a
      frenzy. And this fearful, naked contact of her on small occasions shocked
      him. He was used to his mother&rsquo;s reserve. And on such occasions he was
      thankful in his heart and soul that he had his mother, so sane and
      wholesome.
    </p>
    <p>
      All the life of Miriam&rsquo;s body was in her eyes, which were usually dark as
      a dark church, but could flame with light like a conflagration. Her face
      scarcely ever altered from its look of brooding. She might have been one
      of the women who went with Mary when Jesus was dead. Her body was not
      flexible and living. She walked with a swing, rather heavily, her head
      bowed forward, pondering. She was not clumsy, and yet none of her
      movements seemed quite THE movement. Often, when wiping the dishes, she
      would stand in bewilderment and chagrin because she had pulled in two
      halves a cup or a tumbler. It was as if, in her fear and self-mistrust,
      she put too much strength into the effort. There was no looseness or
      abandon about her. Everything was gripped stiff with intensity, and her
      effort, overcharged, closed in on itself.
    </p>
    <p>
      She rarely varied from her swinging, forward, intense walk. Occasionally
      she ran with Paul down the fields. Then her eyes blazed naked in a kind of
      ecstasy that frightened him. But she was physically afraid. If she were
      getting over a stile, she gripped his hands in a little hard anguish, and
      began to lose her presence of mind. And he could not persuade her to jump
      from even a small height. Her eyes dilated, became exposed and
      palpitating.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No!&rdquo; she cried, half laughing in terror&mdash;&ldquo;no!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You shall!&rdquo; he cried once, and, jerking her forward, he brought her
      falling from the fence. But her wild &ldquo;Ah!&rdquo; of pain, as if she were losing
      consciousness, cut him. She landed on her feet safely, and afterwards had
      courage in this respect.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was very much dissatisfied with her lot.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t you like being at home?&rdquo; Paul asked her, surprised.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who would?&rdquo; she answered, low and intense. &ldquo;What is it? I&rsquo;m all day
      cleaning what the boys make just as bad in five minutes. I don&rsquo;t WANT to
      be at home.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What do you want, then?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want to do something. I want a chance like anybody else. Why should I,
      because I&rsquo;m a girl, be kept at home and not allowed to be anything? What
      chance HAVE I?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Chance of what?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of knowing anything&mdash;of learning, of doing anything. It&rsquo;s not fair,
      because I&rsquo;m a woman.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She seemed very bitter. Paul wondered. In his own home Annie was almost
      glad to be a girl. She had not so much responsibility; things were lighter
      for her. She never wanted to be other than a girl. But Miriam almost
      fiercely wished she were a man. And yet she hated men at the same time.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But it&rsquo;s as well to be a woman as a man,&rdquo; he said, frowning.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ha! Is it? Men have everything.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I should think women ought to be as glad to be women as men are to be
      men,&rdquo; he answered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No!&rdquo;&mdash;she shook her head&mdash;&ldquo;no! Everything the men have.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But what do you want?&rdquo; he asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want to learn. Why SHOULD it be that I know nothing?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What! such as mathematics and French?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why SHOULDN&rsquo;T I know mathematics? Yes!&rdquo; she cried, her eye expanding in a
      kind of defiance.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, you can learn as much as I know,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll teach you, if you
      like.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Her eyes dilated. She mistrusted him as teacher.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Would you?&rdquo; he asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      Her head had dropped, and she was sucking her finger broodingly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; she said hesitatingly.
    </p>
    <p>
      He used to tell his mother all these things.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m going to teach Miriam algebra,&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; replied Mrs. Morel, &ldquo;I hope she&rsquo;ll get fat on it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      When he went up to the farm on the Monday evening, it was drawing
      twilight. Miriam was just sweeping up the kitchen, and was kneeling at the
      hearth when he entered. Everyone was out but her. She looked round at him,
      flushed, her dark eyes shining, her fine hair falling about her face.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hello!&rdquo; she said, soft and musical. &ldquo;I knew it was you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I knew your step. Nobody treads so quick and firm.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He sat down, sighing.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ready to do some algebra?&rdquo; he asked, drawing a little book from his
      pocket.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He could feel her backing away.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You said you wanted,&rdquo; he insisted.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To-night, though?&rdquo; she faltered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I came on purpose. And if you want to learn it, you must begin.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She took up her ashes in the dustpan and looked at him, half tremulously,
      laughing.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, but to-night! You see, I haven&rsquo;t thought of it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, my goodness! Take the ashes and come.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He went and sat on the stone bench in the back-yard, where the big
      milk-cans were standing, tipped up, to air. The men were in the cowsheds.
      He could hear the little sing-song of the milk spurting into the pails.
      Presently she came, bringing some big greenish apples.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You know you like them,&rdquo; she said.
    </p>
    <p>
      He took a bite.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Sit down,&rdquo; he said, with his mouth full.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was short-sighted, and peered over his shoulder. It irritated him. He
      gave her the book quickly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Here,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s only letters for figures. You put down &lsquo;a&rsquo; instead
      of &lsquo;2&rsquo; or &lsquo;6&rsquo;.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They worked, he talking, she with her head down on the book. He was quick
      and hasty. She never answered. Occasionally, when he demanded of her, &ldquo;Do
      you see?&rdquo; she looked up at him, her eyes wide with the half-laugh that
      comes of fear. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t you?&rdquo; he cried.
    </p>
    <p>
      He had been too fast. But she said nothing. He questioned her more, then
      got hot. It made his blood rouse to see her there, as it were, at his
      mercy, her mouth open, her eyes dilated with laughter that was afraid,
      apologetic, ashamed. Then Edgar came along with two buckets of milk.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hello!&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;What are you doing?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Algebra,&rdquo; replied Paul.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Algebra!&rdquo; repeated Edgar curiously. Then he passed on with a laugh. Paul
      took a bite at his forgotten apple, looked at the miserable cabbages in
      the garden, pecked into lace by the fowls, and he wanted to pull them up.
      Then he glanced at Miriam. She was poring over the book, seemed absorbed
      in it, yet trembling lest she could not get at it. It made him cross. She
      was ruddy and beautiful. Yet her soul seemed to be intensely supplicating.
      The algebra-book she closed, shrinking, knowing he was angered; and at the
      same instant he grew gentle, seeing her hurt because she did not
      understand.
    </p>
    <p>
      But things came slowly to her. And when she held herself in a grip, seemed
      so utterly humble before the lesson, it made his blood rouse. He stormed
      at her, got ashamed, continued the lesson, and grew furious again, abusing
      her. She listened in silence. Occasionally, very rarely, she defended
      herself. Her liquid dark eyes blazed at him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You don&rsquo;t give me time to learn it,&rdquo; she said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All right,&rdquo; he answered, throwing the book on the table and lighting a
      cigarette. Then, after a while, he went back to her repentant. So the
      lessons went. He was always either in a rage or very gentle.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What do you tremble your SOUL before it for?&rdquo; he cried. &ldquo;You don&rsquo;t learn
      algebra with your blessed soul. Can&rsquo;t you look at it with your clear
      simple wits?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Often, when he went again into the kitchen, Mrs. Leivers would look at him
      reproachfully, saying:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Paul, don&rsquo;t be so hard on Miriam. She may not be quick, but I&rsquo;m sure she
      tries.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t help it,&rdquo; he said rather pitiably. &ldquo;I go off like it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You don&rsquo;t mind me, Miriam, do you?&rdquo; he asked of the girl later.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; she reassured him in her beautiful deep tones&mdash;&ldquo;no, I don&rsquo;t
      mind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t mind me; it&rsquo;s my fault.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But, in spite of himself, his blood began to boil with her. It was strange
      that no one else made him in such fury. He flared against her. Once he
      threw the pencil in her face. There was a silence. She turned her face
      slightly aside.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t&mdash;&rdquo; he began, but got no farther, feeling weak in all his
      bones. She never reproached him or was angry with him. He was often
      cruelly ashamed. But still again his anger burst like a bubble surcharged;
      and still, when he saw her eager, silent, as it were, blind face, he felt
      he wanted to throw the pencil in it; and still, when he saw her hand
      trembling and her mouth parted with suffering, his heart was scalded with
      pain for her. And because of the intensity to which she roused him, he
      sought her.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then he often avoided her and went with Edgar. Miriam and her brother were
      naturally antagonistic. Edgar was a rationalist, who was curious, and had
      a sort of scientific interest in life. It was a great bitterness to Miriam
      to see herself deserted by Paul for Edgar, who seemed so much lower. But
      the youth was very happy with her elder brother. The two men spent
      afternoons together on the land or in the loft doing carpentry, when it
      rained. And they talked together, or Paul taught Edgar the songs he
      himself had learned from Annie at the piano. And often all the men, Mr.
      Leivers as well, had bitter debates on the nationalizing of the land and
      similar problems. Paul had already heard his mother&rsquo;s views, and as these
      were as yet his own, he argued for her. Miriam attended and took part, but
      was all the time waiting until it should be over and a personal
      communication might begin.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;After all,&rdquo; she said within herself, &ldquo;if the land were nationalized,
      Edgar and Paul and I would be just the same.&rdquo; So she waited for the youth
      to come back to her.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was studying for his painting. He loved to sit at home, alone with his
      mother, at night, working and working. She sewed or read. Then, looking up
      from his task, he would rest his eyes for a moment on her face, that was
      bright with living warmth, and he returned gladly to his work.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can do my best things when you sit there in your rocking-chair,
      mother,&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure!&rdquo; she exclaimed, sniffing with mock scepticism. But she felt it
      was so, and her heart quivered with brightness. For many hours she sat
      still, slightly conscious of him labouring away, whilst she worked or read
      her book. And he, with all his soul&rsquo;s intensity directing his pencil,
      could feel her warmth inside him like strength. They were both very happy
      so, and both unconscious of it. These times, that meant so much, and which
      were real living, they almost ignored.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was conscious only when stimulated. A sketch finished, he always wanted
      to take it to Miriam. Then he was stimulated into knowledge of the work he
      had produced unconsciously. In contact with Miriam he gained insight; his
      vision went deeper. From his mother he drew the life-warmth, the strength
      to produce; Miriam urged this warmth into intensity like a white light.
    </p>
    <p>
      When he returned to the factory the conditions of work were better. He had
      Wednesday afternoon off to go to the Art School&mdash;Miss Jordan&rsquo;s
      provision&mdash;returning in the evening. Then the factory closed at six
      instead of eight on Thursday and Friday evenings.
    </p>
    <p>
      One evening in the summer Miriam and he went over the fields by Herod&rsquo;s
      Farm on their way from the library home. So it was only three miles to
      Willey Farm. There was a yellow glow over the mowing-grass, and the
      sorrel-heads burned crimson. Gradually, as they walked along the high
      land, the gold in the west sank down to red, the red to crimson, and then
      the chill blue crept up against the glow.
    </p>
    <p>
      They came out upon the high road to Alfreton, which ran white between the
      darkening fields. There Paul hesitated. It was two miles home for him, one
      mile forward for Miriam. They both looked up the road that ran in shadow
      right under the glow of the north-west sky. On the crest of the hill,
      Selby, with its stark houses and the up-pricked headstocks of the pit,
      stood in black silhouette small against the sky.
    </p>
    <p>
      He looked at his watch.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nine o&rsquo;clock!&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      The pair stood, loth to part, hugging their books.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The wood is so lovely now,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;I wanted you to see it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He followed her slowly across the road to the white gate.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They grumble so if I&rsquo;m late,&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But you&rsquo;re not doing anything wrong,&rdquo; she answered impatiently.
    </p>
    <p>
      He followed her across the nibbled pasture in the dusk. There was a
      coolness in the wood, a scent of leaves, of honeysuckle, and a twilight.
      The two walked in silence. Night came wonderfully there, among the throng
      of dark tree-trunks. He looked round, expectant.
    </p>
    <p>
      She wanted to show him a certain wild-rose bush she had discovered. She
      knew it was wonderful. And yet, till he had seen it, she felt it had not
      come into her soul. Only he could make it her own, immortal. She was
      dissatisfied.
    </p>
    <p>
      Dew was already on the paths. In the old oak-wood a mist was rising, and
      he hesitated, wondering whether one whiteness were a strand of fog or only
      campion-flowers pallid in a cloud.
    </p>
    <p>
      By the time they came to the pine-trees Miriam was getting very eager and
      very tense. Her bush might be gone. She might not be able to find it; and
      she wanted it so much. Almost passionately she wanted to be with him when
      he stood before the flowers. They were going to have a communion together&mdash;something
      that thrilled her, something holy. He was walking beside her in silence.
      They were very near to each other. She trembled, and he listened, vaguely
      anxious.
    </p>
    <p>
      Coming to the edge of the wood, they saw the sky in front, like
      mother-of-pearl, and the earth growing dark. Somewhere on the outermost
      branches of the pine-wood the honeysuckle was streaming scent.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Where?&rdquo; he asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Down the middle path,&rdquo; she murmured, quivering.
    </p>
    <p>
      When they turned the corner of the path she stood still. In the wide walk
      between the pines, gazing rather frightened, she could distinguish nothing
      for some moments; the greying light robbed things of their colour. Then
      she saw her bush.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah!&rdquo; she cried, hastening forward.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was very still. The tree was tall and straggling. It had thrown its
      briers over a hawthorn-bush, and its long streamers trailed thick, right
      down to the grass, splashing the darkness everywhere with great spilt
      stars, pure white. In bosses of ivory and in large splashed stars the
      roses gleamed on the darkness of foliage and stems and grass. Paul and
      Miriam stood close together, silent, and watched. Point after point the
      steady roses shone out to them, seeming to kindle something in their
      souls. The dusk came like smoke around, and still did not put out the
      roses.
    </p>
    <p>
      Paul looked into Miriam&rsquo;s eyes. She was pale and expectant with wonder,
      her lips were parted, and her dark eyes lay open to him. His look seemed
      to travel down into her. Her soul quivered. It was the communion she
      wanted. He turned aside, as if pained. He turned to the bush.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They seem as if they walk like butterflies, and shake themselves,&rdquo; he
      said.
    </p>
    <p>
      She looked at her roses. They were white, some incurved and holy, others
      expanded in an ecstasy. The tree was dark as a shadow. She lifted her hand
      impulsively to the flowers; she went forward and touched them in worship.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let us go,&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a cool scent of ivory roses&mdash;a white, virgin scent.
      Something made him feel anxious and imprisoned. The two walked in silence.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Till Sunday,&rdquo; he said quietly, and left her; and she walked home slowly,
      feeling her soul satisfied with the holiness of the night. He stumbled
      down the path. And as soon as he was out of the wood, in the free open
      meadow, where he could breathe, he started to run as fast as he could. It
      was like a delicious delirium in his veins.
    </p>
    <p>
      Always when he went with Miriam, and it grew rather late, he knew his
      mother was fretting and getting angry about him&mdash;why, he could not
      understand. As he went into the house, flinging down his cap, his mother
      looked up at the clock. She had been sitting thinking, because a chill to
      her eyes prevented her reading. She could feel Paul being drawn away by
      this girl. And she did not care for Miriam. &ldquo;She is one of those who will
      want to suck a man&rsquo;s soul out till he has none of his own left,&rdquo; she said
      to herself; &ldquo;and he is just such a gaby as to let himself be absorbed. She
      will never let him become a man; she never will.&rdquo; So, while he was away
      with Miriam, Mrs. Morel grew more and more worked up.
    </p>
    <p>
      She glanced at the clock and said, coldly and rather tired:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have been far enough to-night.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      His soul, warm and exposed from contact with the girl, shrank.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You must have been right home with her,&rdquo; his mother continued.
    </p>
    <p>
      He would not answer. Mrs. Morel, looking at him quickly, saw his hair was
      damp on his forehead with haste, saw him frowning in his heavy fashion,
      resentfully.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;She must be wonderfully fascinating, that you can&rsquo;t get away from her,
      but must go trailing eight miles at this time of night.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He was hurt between the past glamour with Miriam and the knowledge that
      his mother fretted. He had meant not to say anything, to refuse to answer.
      But he could not harden his heart to ignore his mother.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I DO like to talk to her,&rdquo; he answered irritably.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is there nobody else to talk to?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You wouldn&rsquo;t say anything if I went with Edgar.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You know I should. You know, whoever you went with, I should say it was
      too far for you to go trailing, late at night, when you&rsquo;ve been to
      Nottingham. Besides&rdquo;&mdash;her voice suddenly flashed into anger and
      contempt&mdash;&ldquo;it is disgusting&mdash;bits of lads and girls courting.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is NOT courting,&rdquo; he cried.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know what else you call it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not! Do you think we SPOON and do? We only talk.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Till goodness knows what time and distance,&rdquo; was the sarcastic rejoinder.
    </p>
    <p>
      Paul snapped at the laces of his boots angrily.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What are you so mad about?&rdquo; he asked. &ldquo;Because you don&rsquo;t like her.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t say I don&rsquo;t like her. But I don&rsquo;t hold with children keeping
      company, and never did.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But you don&rsquo;t mind our Annie going out with Jim Inger.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They&rsquo;ve more sense than you two.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Our Annie&rsquo;s not one of the deep sort.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He failed to see the meaning of this remark. But his mother looked tired.
      She was never so strong after William&rsquo;s death; and her eyes hurt her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;it&rsquo;s so pretty in the country. Mr. Sleath asked about
      you. He said he&rsquo;d missed you. Are you a bit better?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I ought to have been in bed a long time ago,&rdquo; she replied.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, mother, you know you wouldn&rsquo;t have gone before quarter-past ten.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, yes, I should!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, little woman, you&rsquo;d say anything now you&rsquo;re disagreeable with me,
      wouldn&rsquo;t you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He kissed her forehead that he knew so well: the deep marks between the
      brows, the rising of the fine hair, greying now, and the proud setting of
      the temples. His hand lingered on her shoulder after his kiss. Then he
      went slowly to bed. He had forgotten Miriam; he only saw how his mother&rsquo;s
      hair was lifted back from her warm, broad brow. And somehow, she was hurt.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then the next time he saw Miriam he said to her:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t let me be late to-night&mdash;not later than ten o&rsquo;clock. My mother
      gets so upset.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miriam dropped her bead, brooding.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why does she get upset?&rdquo; she asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because she says I oughtn&rsquo;t to be out late when I have to get up early.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well!&rdquo; said Miriam, rather quietly, with just a touch of a sneer.
    </p>
    <p>
      He resented that. And he was usually late again.
    </p>
    <p>
      That there was any love growing between him and Miriam neither of them
      would have acknowledged. He thought he was too sane for such
      sentimentality, and she thought herself too lofty. They both were late in
      coming to maturity, and psychical ripeness was much behind even the
      physical. Miriam was exceedingly sensitive, as her mother had always been.
      The slightest grossness made her recoil almost in anguish. Her brothers
      were brutal, but never coarse in speech. The men did all the discussing of
      farm matters outside. But, perhaps, because of the continual business of
      birth and of begetting which goes on upon every farm, Miriam was the more
      hypersensitive to the matter, and her blood was chastened almost to
      disgust of the faintest suggestion of such intercourse. Paul took his
      pitch from her, and their intimacy went on in an utterly blanched and
      chaste fashion. It could never be mentioned that the mare was in foal.
    </p>
    <p>
      When he was nineteen, he was earning only twenty shillings a week, but he
      was happy. His painting went well, and life went well enough. On the Good
      Friday he organised a walk to the Hemlock Stone. There were three lads of
      his own age, then Annie and Arthur, Miriam and Geoffrey. Arthur,
      apprenticed as an electrician in Nottingham, was home for the holiday.
      Morel, as usual, was up early, whistling and sawing in the yard. At seven
      o&rsquo;clock the family heard him buy threepennyworth of hot-cross buns; he
      talked with gusto to the little girl who brought them, calling her &ldquo;my
      darling&rdquo;. He turned away several boys who came with more buns, telling
      them they had been &ldquo;kested&rdquo; by a little lass. Then Mrs. Morel got up, and
      the family straggled down. It was an immense luxury to everybody, this
      lying in bed just beyond the ordinary time on a weekday. And Paul and
      Arthur read before breakfast, and had the meal unwashed, sitting in their
      shirt-sleeves. This was another holiday luxury. The room was warm.
      Everything felt free of care and anxiety. There was a sense of plenty in
      the house.
    </p>
    <p>
      While the boys were reading, Mrs. Morel went into the garden. They were
      now in another house, an old one, near the Scargill Street home, which had
      been left soon after William had died. Directly came an excited cry from
      the garden:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Paul! Paul! come and look!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It was his mother&rsquo;s voice. He threw down his book and went out. There was
      a long garden that ran to a field. It was a grey, cold day, with a sharp
      wind blowing out of Derbyshire. Two fields away Bestwood began, with a
      jumble of roofs and red house-ends, out of which rose the church tower and
      the spire of the Congregational Chapel. And beyond went woods and hills,
      right away to the pale grey heights of the Pennine Chain.
    </p>
    <p>
      Paul looked down the garden for his mother. Her head appeared among the
      young currant-bushes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come here!&rdquo; she cried.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What for?&rdquo; he answered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come and see.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She had been looking at the buds on the currant trees. Paul went up.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To think,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;that here I might never have seen them!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Her son went to her side. Under the fence, in a little bed, was a ravel of
      poor grassy leaves, such as come from very immature bulbs, and three
      scyllas in bloom. Mrs. Morel pointed to the deep blue flowers.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now, just see those!&rdquo; she exclaimed. &ldquo;I was looking at the currant
      bushes, when, thinks I to myself, &lsquo;There&rsquo;s something very blue; is it a
      bit of sugar-bag?&rsquo; and there, behold you! Sugar-bag! Three glories of the
      snow, and such beauties! But where on earth did they come from?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know,&rdquo; said Paul.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, that&rsquo;s a marvel, now! I THOUGHT I knew every weed and blade in this
      garden. But HAVEN&rsquo;T they done well? You see, that gooseberry-bush just
      shelters them. Not nipped, not touched!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He crouched down and turned up the bells of the little blue flowers.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They&rsquo;re a glorious colour!&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Aren&rsquo;t they!&rdquo; she cried. &ldquo;I guess they come from Switzerland, where they
      say they have such lovely things. Fancy them against the snow! But where
      have they come from? They can&rsquo;t have BLOWN here, can they?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Then he remembered having set here a lot of little trash of bulbs to
      mature.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And you never told me,&rdquo; she said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No! I thought I&rsquo;d leave it till they might flower.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And now, you see! I might have missed them. And I&rsquo;ve never had a glory of
      the snow in my garden in my life.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She was full of excitement and elation. The garden was an endless joy to
      her. Paul was thankful for her sake at last to be in a house with a long
      garden that went down to a field. Every morning after breakfast she went
      out and was happy pottering about in it. And it was true, she knew every
      weed and blade.
    </p>
    <p>
      Everybody turned up for the walk. Food was packed, and they set off, a
      merry, delighted party. They hung over the wall of the mill-race, dropped
      paper in the water on one side of the tunnel and watched it shoot out on
      the other. They stood on the foot-bridge over Boathouse Station and looked
      at the metals gleaming coldly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You should see the Flying Scotsman come through at half-past six!&rdquo; said
      Leonard, whose father was a signalman. &ldquo;Lad, but she doesn&rsquo;t half buzz!&rdquo;
       and the little party looked up the lines one way, to London, and the other
      way, to Scotland, and they felt the touch of these two magical places.
    </p>
    <p>
      In Ilkeston the colliers were waiting in gangs for the public-houses to
      open. It was a town of idleness and lounging. At Stanton Gate the iron
      foundry blazed. Over everything there were great discussions. At Trowell
      they crossed again from Derbyshire into Nottinghamshire. They came to the
      Hemlock Stone at dinner-time. Its field was crowded with folk from
      Nottingham and Ilkeston.
    </p>
    <p>
      They had expected a venerable and dignified monument. They found a little,
      gnarled, twisted stump of rock, something like a decayed mushroom,
      standing out pathetically on the side of a field. Leonard and Dick
      immediately proceeded to carve their initials, &ldquo;L. W.&rdquo; and &ldquo;R. P.&rdquo;, in the
      old red sandstone; but Paul desisted, because he had read in the newspaper
      satirical remarks about initial-carvers, who could find no other road to
      immortality. Then all the lads climbed to the top of the rock to look
      round.
    </p>
    <p>
      Everywhere in the field below, factory girls and lads were eating lunch or
      sporting about. Beyond was the garden of an old manor. It had yew-hedges
      and thick clumps and borders of yellow crocuses round the lawn.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;See,&rdquo; said Paul to Miriam, &ldquo;what a quiet garden!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She saw the dark yews and the golden crocuses, then she looked gratefully.
      He had not seemed to belong to her among all these others; he was
      different then&mdash;not her Paul, who understood the slightest quiver of
      her innermost soul, but something else, speaking another language than
      hers. How it hurt her, and deadened her very perceptions. Only when he
      came right back to her, leaving his other, his lesser self, as she
      thought, would she feel alive again. And now he asked her to look at this
      garden, wanting the contact with her again. Impatient of the set in the
      field, she turned to the quiet lawn, surrounded by sheaves of shut-up
      crocuses. A feeling of stillness, almost of ecstasy, came over her. It
      felt almost as if she were alone with him in this garden.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then he left her again and joined the others. Soon they started home.
      Miriam loitered behind, alone. She did not fit in with the others; she
      could very rarely get into human relations with anyone: so her friend, her
      companion, her lover, was Nature. She saw the sun declining wanly. In the
      dusky, cold hedgerows were some red leaves. She lingered to gather them,
      tenderly, passionately. The love in her finger-tips caressed the leaves;
      the passion in her heart came to a glow upon the leaves.
    </p>
    <p>
      Suddenly she realised she was alone in a strange road, and she hurried
      forward. Turning a corner in the lane, she came upon Paul, who stood bent
      over something, his mind fixed on it, working away steadily, patiently, a
      little hopelessly. She hesitated in her approach, to watch.
    </p>
    <p>
      He remained concentrated in the middle of the road. Beyond, one rift of
      rich gold in that colourless grey evening seemed to make him stand out in
      dark relief. She saw him, slender and firm, as if the setting sun had
      given him to her. A deep pain took hold of her, and she knew she must love
      him. And she had discovered him, discovered in him a rare potentiality,
      discovered his loneliness. Quivering as at some &ldquo;annunciation&rdquo;, she went
      slowly forward.
    </p>
    <p>
      At last he looked up.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why,&rdquo; he exclaimed gratefully, &ldquo;have you waited for me!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She saw a deep shadow in his eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is it?&rdquo; she asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The spring broken here;&rdquo; and he showed her where his umbrella was
      injured.
    </p>
    <p>
      Instantly, with some shame, she knew he had not done the damage himself,
      but that Geoffrey was responsible.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is only an old umbrella, isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo; she asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      She wondered why he, who did not usually trouble over trifles, made such a
      mountain of this molehill.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But it was William&rsquo;s an&rsquo; my mother can&rsquo;t help but know,&rdquo; he said quietly,
      still patiently working at the umbrella.
    </p>
    <p>
      The words went through Miriam like a blade. This, then, was the
      confirmation of her vision of him! She looked at him. But there was about
      him a certain reserve, and she dared not comfort him, not even speak
      softly to him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come on,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t do it;&rdquo; and they went in silence along the
      road.
    </p>
    <p>
      That same evening they were walking along under the trees by Nether Green.
      He was talking to her fretfully, seemed to be struggling to convince
      himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You know,&rdquo; he said, with an effort, &ldquo;if one person loves, the other
      does.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah!&rdquo; she answered. &ldquo;Like mother said to me when I was little, &lsquo;Love
      begets love.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, something like that, I think it MUST be.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hope so, because, if it were not, love might be a very terrible thing,&rdquo;
       she said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, but it IS&mdash;at least with most people,&rdquo; he answered.
    </p>
    <p>
      And Miriam, thinking he had assured himself, felt strong in herself. She
      always regarded that sudden coming upon him in the lane as a revelation.
      And this conversation remained graven in her mind as one of the letters of
      the law.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now she stood with him and for him. When, about this time, he outraged the
      family feeling at Willey Farm by some overbearing insult, she stuck to
      him, and believed he was right. And at this time she dreamed dreams of
      him, vivid, unforgettable. These dreams came again later on, developed to
      a more subtle psychological stage.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the Easter Monday the same party took an excursion to Wingfield Manor.
      It was great excitement to Miriam to catch a train at Sethley Bridge, amid
      all the bustle of the Bank Holiday crowd. They left the train at Alfreton.
      Paul was interested in the street and in the colliers with their dogs.
      Here was a new race of miners. Miriam did not live till they came to the
      church. They were all rather timid of entering, with their bags of food,
      for fear of being turned out. Leonard, a comic, thin fellow, went first;
      Paul, who would have died rather than be sent back, went last. The place
      was decorated for Easter. In the font hundreds of white narcissi seemed to
      be growing. The air was dim and coloured from the windows and thrilled
      with a subtle scent of lilies and narcissi. In that atmosphere Miriam&rsquo;s
      soul came into a glow. Paul was afraid of the things he mustn&rsquo;t do; and he
      was sensitive to the feel of the place. Miriam turned to him. He answered.
      They were together. He would not go beyond the Communion-rail. She loved
      him for that. Her soul expanded into prayer beside him. He felt the
      strange fascination of shadowy religious places. All his latent mysticism
      quivered into life. She was drawn to him. He was a prayer along with her.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miriam very rarely talked to the other lads. They at once became awkward
      in conversation with her. So usually she was silent.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was past midday when they climbed the steep path to the manor. All
      things shone softly in the sun, which was wonderfully warm and enlivening.
      Celandines and violets were out. Everybody was tip-top full with
      happiness. The glitter of the ivy, the soft, atmospheric grey of the
      castle walls, the gentleness of everything near the ruin, was perfect.
    </p>
    <p>
      The manor is of hard, pale grey stone, and the other walls are blank and
      calm. The young folk were in raptures. They went in trepidation, almost
      afraid that the delight of exploring this ruin might be denied them. In
      the first courtyard, within the high broken walls, were farm-carts, with
      their shafts lying idle on the ground, the tyres of the wheels brilliant
      with gold-red rust. It was very still.
    </p>
    <p>
      All eagerly paid their sixpences, and went timidly through the fine clean
      arch of the inner courtyard. They were shy. Here on the pavement, where
      the hall had been, an old thorn tree was budding. All kinds of strange
      openings and broken rooms were in the shadow around them.
    </p>
    <p>
      After lunch they set off once more to explore the ruin. This time the
      girls went with the boys, who could act as guides and expositors. There
      was one tall tower in a corner, rather tottering, where they say Mary
      Queen of Scots was imprisoned.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Think of the Queen going up here!&rdquo; said Miriam in a low voice, as she
      climbed the hollow stairs.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If she could get up,&rdquo; said Paul, &ldquo;for she had rheumatism like anything. I
      reckon they treated her rottenly.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You don&rsquo;t think she deserved it?&rdquo; asked Miriam.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, I don&rsquo;t. She was only lively.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They continued to mount the winding staircase. A high wind, blowing
      through the loopholes, went rushing up the shaft, and filled the girl&rsquo;s
      skirts like a balloon, so that she was ashamed, until he took the hem of
      her dress and held it down for her. He did it perfectly simply, as he
      would have picked up her glove. She remembered this always.
    </p>
    <p>
      Round the broken top of the tower the ivy bushed out, old and handsome.
      Also, there were a few chill gillivers, in pale cold bud. Miriam wanted to
      lean over for some ivy, but he would not let her. Instead, she had to wait
      behind him, and take from him each spray as he gathered it and held it to
      her, each one separately, in the purest manner of chivalry. The tower
      seemed to rock in the wind. They looked over miles and miles of wooded
      country, and country with gleams of pasture.
    </p>
    <p>
      The crypt underneath the manor was beautiful, and in perfect preservation.
      Paul made a drawing: Miriam stayed with him. She was thinking of Mary
      Queen of Scots looking with her strained, hopeless eyes, that could not
      understand misery, over the hills whence no help came, or sitting in this
      crypt, being told of a God as cold as the place she sat in.
    </p>
    <p>
      They set off again gaily, looking round on their beloved manor that stood
      so clean and big on its hill.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Supposing you could have THAT farm,&rdquo; said Paul to Miriam.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Wouldn&rsquo;t it be lovely to come and see you!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They were now in the bare country of stone walls, which he loved, and
      which, though only ten miles from home, seemed so foreign to Miriam. The
      party was straggling. As they were crossing a large meadow that sloped
      away from the sun, along a path embedded with innumerable tiny glittering
      points, Paul, walking alongside, laced his fingers in the strings of the
      bag Miriam was carrying, and instantly she felt Annie behind, watchful and
      jealous. But the meadow was bathed in a glory of sunshine, and the path
      was jewelled, and it was seldom that he gave her any sign. She held her
      fingers very still among the strings of the bag, his fingers touching; and
      the place was golden as a vision.
    </p>
    <p>
      At last they came into the straggling grey village of Crich, that lies
      high. Beyond the village was the famous Crich Stand that Paul could see
      from the garden at home. The party pushed on. Great expanse of country
      spread around and below. The lads were eager to get to the top of the
      hill. It was capped by a round knoll, half of which was by now cut away,
      and on the top of which stood an ancient monument, sturdy and squat, for
      signalling in old days far down into the level lands of Nottinghamshire
      and Leicestershire.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was blowing so hard, high up there in the exposed place, that the only
      way to be safe was to stand nailed by the wind to the wan of the tower. At
      their feet fell the precipice where the limestone was quarried away. Below
      was a jumble of hills and tiny villages&mdash;Mattock, Ambergate, Stoney
      Middleton. The lads were eager to spy out the church of Bestwood, far away
      among the rather crowded country on the left. They were disgusted that it
      seemed to stand on a plain. They saw the hills of Derbyshire fall into the
      monotony of the Midlands that swept away South.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miriam was somewhat scared by the wind, but the lads enjoyed it. They went
      on, miles and miles, to Whatstandwell. All the food was eaten, everybody
      was hungry, and there was very little money to get home with. But they
      managed to procure a loaf and a currant-loaf, which they hacked to pieces
      with shut-knives, and ate sitting on the wall near the bridge, watching
      the bright Derwent rushing by, and the brakes from Matlock pulling up at
      the inn.
    </p>
    <p>
      Paul was now pale with weariness. He had been responsible for the party
      all day, and now he was done. Miriam understood, and kept close to him,
      and he left himself in her hands.
    </p>
    <p>
      They had an hour to wait at Ambergate Station. Trains came, crowded with
      excursionists returning to Manchester, Birmingham, and London.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We might be going there&mdash;folk easily might think we&rsquo;re going that
      far,&rdquo; said Paul.
    </p>
    <p>
      They got back rather late. Miriam, walking home with Geoffrey, watched the
      moon rise big and red and misty. She felt something was fulfilled in her.
    </p>
    <p>
      She had an elder sister, Agatha, who was a school-teacher. Between the two
      girls was a feud. Miriam considered Agatha worldly. And she wanted herself
      to be a school-teacher.
    </p>
    <p>
      One Saturday afternoon Agatha and Miriam were upstairs dressing. Their
      bedroom was over the stable. It was a low room, not very large, and bare.
      Miriam had nailed on the wall a reproduction of Veronese&rsquo;s &ldquo;St.
      Catherine&rdquo;. She loved the woman who sat in the window, dreaming. Her own
      windows were too small to sit in. But the front one was dripped over with
      honeysuckle and virginia creeper, and looked upon the tree-tops of the
      oak-wood across the yard, while the little back window, no bigger than a
      handkerchief, was a loophole to the east, to the dawn beating up against
      the beloved round hills.
    </p>
    <p>
      The two sisters did not talk much to each other. Agatha, who was fair and
      small and determined, had rebelled against the home atmosphere, against
      the doctrine of &ldquo;the other cheek&rdquo;. She was out in the world now, in a fair
      way to be independent. And she insisted on worldly values, on appearance,
      on manners, on position, which Miriam would fain have ignored.
    </p>
    <p>
      Both girls liked to be upstairs, out of the way, when Paul came. They
      preferred to come running down, open the stair-foot door, and see him
      watching, expectant of them. Miriam stood painfully pulling over her head
      a rosary he had given her. It caught in the fine mesh of her hair. But at
      last she had it on, and the red-brown wooden beads looked well against her
      cool brown neck. She was a well-developed girl, and very handsome. But in
      the little looking-glass nailed against the whitewashed wall she could
      only see a fragment of herself at a time. Agatha had bought a little
      mirror of her own, which she propped up to suit herself. Miriam was near
      the window. Suddenly she heard the well-known click of the chain, and she
      saw Paul fling open the gate, push his bicycle into the yard. She saw him
      look at the house, and she shrank away. He walked in a nonchalant fashion,
      and his bicycle went with him as if it were a live thing.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Paul&rsquo;s come!&rdquo; she exclaimed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Aren&rsquo;t you glad?&rdquo; said Agatha cuttingly.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miriam stood still in amazement and bewilderment.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, aren&rsquo;t you?&rdquo; she asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, but I&rsquo;m not going to let him see it, and think I wanted him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miriam was startled. She heard him putting his bicycle in the stable
      underneath, and talking to Jimmy, who had been a pit-horse, and who was
      seedy.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, Jimmy my lad, how are ter? Nobbut sick an&rsquo; sadly, like? Why, then,
      it&rsquo;s a shame, my owd lad.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She heard the rope run through the hole as the horse lifted its head from
      the lad&rsquo;s caress. How she loved to listen when he thought only the horse
      could hear. But there was a serpent in her Eden. She searched earnestly in
      herself to see if she wanted Paul Morel. She felt there would be some
      disgrace in it. Full of twisted feeling, she was afraid she did want him.
      She stood self-convicted. Then came an agony of new shame. She shrank
      within herself in a coil of torture. Did she want Paul Morel, and did he
      know she wanted him? What a subtle infamy upon her. She felt as if her
      whole soul coiled into knots of shame.
    </p>
    <p>
      Agatha was dressed first, and ran downstairs. Miriam heard her greet the
      lad gaily, knew exactly how brilliant her grey eyes became with that tone.
      She herself would have felt it bold to have greeted him in such wise. Yet
      there she stood under the self-accusation of wanting him, tied to that
      stake of torture. In bitter perplexity she kneeled down and prayed:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;O Lord, let me not love Paul Morel. Keep me from loving him, if I ought
      not to love him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Something anomalous in the prayer arrested her. She lifted her head and
      pondered. How could it be wrong to love him? Love was God&rsquo;s gift. And yet
      it caused her shame. That was because of him, Paul Morel. But, then, it
      was not his affair, it was her own, between herself and God. She was to be
      a sacrifice. But it was God&rsquo;s sacrifice, not Paul Morel&rsquo;s or her own.
      After a few minutes she hid her face in the pillow again, and said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But, Lord, if it is Thy will that I should love him, make me love him&mdash;as
      Christ would, who died for the souls of men. Make me love him splendidly,
      because he is Thy son.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She remained kneeling for some time, quite still, and deeply moved, her
      black hair against the red squares and the lavender-sprigged squares of
      the patchwork quilt. Prayer was almost essential to her. Then she fell
      into that rapture of self-sacrifice, identifying herself with a God who
      was sacrificed, which gives to so many human souls their deepest bliss.
    </p>
    <p>
      When she went downstairs Paul was lying back in an armchair, holding forth
      with much vehemence to Agatha, who was scorning a little painting he had
      brought to show her. Miriam glanced at the two, and avoided their levity.
      She went into the parlour to be alone.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was tea-time before she was able to speak to Paul, and then her manner
      was so distant he thought he had offended her.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miriam discontinued her practice of going each Thursday evening to the
      library in Bestwood. After calling for Paul regularly during the whole
      spring, a number of trifling incidents and tiny insults from his family
      awakened her to their attitude towards her, and she decided to go no more.
      So she announced to Paul one evening she would not call at his house again
      for him on Thursday nights.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why?&rdquo; he asked, very short.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nothing. Only I&rsquo;d rather not.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But,&rdquo; she faltered, &ldquo;if you&rsquo;d care to meet me, we could still go
      together.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Meet you where?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Somewhere&mdash;where you like.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I shan&rsquo;t meet you anywhere. I don&rsquo;t see why you shouldn&rsquo;t keep calling
      for me. But if you won&rsquo;t, I don&rsquo;t want to meet you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      So the Thursday evenings which had been so precious to her, and to him,
      were dropped. He worked instead. Mrs. Morel sniffed with satisfaction at
      this arrangement.
    </p>
    <p>
      He would not have it that they were lovers. The intimacy between them had
      been kept so abstract, such a matter of the soul, all thought and weary
      struggle into consciousness, that he saw it only as a platonic friendship.
      He stoutly denied there was anything else between them. Miriam was silent,
      or else she very quietly agreed. He was a fool who did not know what was
      happening to himself. By tacit agreement they ignored the remarks and
      insinuations of their acquaintances.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We aren&rsquo;t lovers, we are friends,&rdquo; he said to her. &ldquo;WE know it. Let them
      talk. What does it matter what they say.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Sometimes, as they were walking together, she slipped her arm timidly into
      his. But he always resented it, and she knew it. It caused a violent
      conflict in him. With Miriam he was always on the high plane of
      abstraction, when his natural fire of love was transmitted into the fine
      stream of thought. She would have it so. If he were jolly and, as she put
      it, flippant, she waited till he came back to her, till the change had
      taken place in him again, and he was wrestling with his own soul,
      frowning, passionate in his desire for understanding. And in this passion
      for understanding her soul lay close to his; she had him all to herself.
      But he must be made abstract first.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then, if she put her arm in his, it caused him almost torture. His
      consciousness seemed to split. The place where she was touching him ran
      hot with friction. He was one internecine battle, and he became cruel to
      her because of it.
    </p>
    <p>
      One evening in midsummer Miriam called at the house, warm from climbing.
      Paul was alone in the kitchen; his mother could be heard moving about
      upstairs.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come and look at the sweet-peas,&rdquo; he said to the girl.
    </p>
    <p>
      They went into the garden. The sky behind the townlet and the church was
      orange-red; the flower-garden was flooded with a strange warm light that
      lifted every leaf into significance. Paul passed along a fine row of
      sweet-peas, gathering a blossom here and there, all cream and pale blue.
      Miriam followed, breathing the fragrance. To her, flowers appealed with
      such strength she felt she must make them part of herself. When she bent
      and breathed a flower, it was as if she and the flower were loving each
      other. Paul hated her for it. There seemed a sort of exposure about the
      action, something too intimate.
    </p>
    <p>
      When he had got a fair bunch, they returned to the house. He listened for
      a moment to his mother&rsquo;s quiet movement upstairs, then he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come here, and let me pin them in for you.&rdquo; He arranged them two or three
      at a time in the bosom of her dress, stepping back now and then to see the
      effect. &ldquo;You know,&rdquo; he said, taking the pin out of his mouth, &ldquo;a woman
      ought always to arrange her flowers before her glass.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Miriam laughed. She thought flowers ought to be pinned in one&rsquo;s dress
      without any care. That Paul should take pains to fix her flowers for her
      was his whim.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was rather offended at her laughter.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Some women do&mdash;those who look decent,&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miriam laughed again, but mirthlessly, to hear him thus mix her up with
      women in a general way. From most men she would have ignored it. But from
      him it hurt her.
    </p>
    <p>
      He had nearly finished arranging the flowers when he heard his mother&rsquo;s
      footstep on the stairs. Hurriedly he pushed in the last pin and turned
      away.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t let mater know,&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miriam picked up her books and stood in the doorway looking with chagrin
      at the beautiful sunset. She would call for Paul no more, she said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good-evening, Mrs. Morel,&rdquo; she said, in a deferential way. She sounded as
      if she felt she had no right to be there.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, is it you, Miriam?&rdquo; replied Mrs. Morel coolly.
    </p>
    <p>
      But Paul insisted on everybody&rsquo;s accepting his friendship with the girl,
      and Mrs. Morel was too wise to have any open rupture.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was not till he was twenty years old that the family could ever afford
      to go away for a holiday. Mrs. Morel had never been away for a holiday,
      except to see her sister, since she had been married. Now at last Paul had
      saved enough money, and they were all going. There was to be a party: some
      of Annie&rsquo;s friends, one friend of Paul&rsquo;s, a young man in the same office
      where William had previously been, and Miriam.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was great excitement writing for rooms. Paul and his mother debated it
      endlessly between them. They wanted a furnished cottage for two weeks. She
      thought one week would be enough, but he insisted on two.
    </p>
    <p>
      At last they got an answer from Mablethorpe, a cottage such as they wished
      for thirty shillings a week. There was immense jubilation. Paul was wild
      with joy for his mother&rsquo;s sake. She would have a real holiday now. He and
      she sat at evening picturing what it would be like. Annie came in, and
      Leonard, and Alice, and Kitty. There was wild rejoicing and anticipation.
      Paul told Miriam. She seemed to brood with joy over it. But the Morel&rsquo;s
      house rang with excitement.
    </p>
    <p>
      They were to go on Saturday morning by the seven train. Paul suggested
      that Miriam should sleep at his house, because it was so far for her to
      walk. She came down for supper. Everybody was so excited that even Miriam
      was accepted with warmth. But almost as soon as she entered the feeling in
      the family became close and tight. He had discovered a poem by Jean
      Ingelow which mentioned Mablethorpe, and so he must read it to Miriam. He
      would never have got so far in the direction of sentimentality as to read
      poetry to his own family. But now they condescended to listen. Miriam sat
      on the sofa absorbed in him. She always seemed absorbed in him, and by
      him, when he was present. Mrs. Morel sat jealously in her own chair. She
      was going to hear also. And even Annie and the father attended, Morel with
      his head cocked on one side, like somebody listening to a sermon and
      feeling conscious of the fact. Paul ducked his head over the book. He had
      got now all the audience he cared for. And Mrs. Morel and Annie almost
      contested with Miriam who should listen best and win his favour. He was in
      very high feather.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But,&rdquo; interrupted Mrs. Morel, &ldquo;what IS the &lsquo;Bride of Enderby&rsquo; that the
      bells are supposed to ring?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s an old tune they used to play on the bells for a warning against
      water. I suppose the Bride of Enderby was drowned in a flood,&rdquo; he replied.
      He had not the faintest knowledge what it really was, but he would never
      have sunk so low as to confess that to his womenfolk. They listened and
      believed him. He believed himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And the people knew what that tune meant?&rdquo; said his mother.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes&mdash;just like the Scotch when they heard &lsquo;The Flowers o&rsquo; the
      Forest&rsquo;&mdash;and when they used to ring the bells backward for alarm.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How?&rdquo; said Annie. &ldquo;A bell sounds the same whether it&rsquo;s rung backwards or
      forwards.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;if you start with the deep bell and ring up to the high
      one&mdash;der&mdash;der&mdash;der&mdash;der&mdash;der&mdash;der&mdash;der&mdash;der!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He ran up the scale. Everybody thought it clever. He thought so too. Then,
      waiting a minute, he continued the poem.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hm!&rdquo; said Mrs. Morel curiously, when he finished. &ldquo;But I wish everything
      that&rsquo;s written weren&rsquo;t so sad.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I canna see what they want drownin&rsquo; theirselves for,&rdquo; said Morel.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a pause. Annie got up to clear the table.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miriam rose to help with the pots.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let ME help to wash up,&rdquo; she said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Certainly not,&rdquo; cried Annie. &ldquo;You sit down again. There aren&rsquo;t many.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And Miriam, who could not be familiar and insist, sat down again to look
      at the book with Paul.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was master of the party; his father was no good. And great tortures he
      suffered lest the tin box should be put out at Firsby instead of at
      Mablethorpe. And he wasn&rsquo;t equal to getting a carriage. His bold little
      mother did that.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Here!&rdquo; she cried to a man. &ldquo;Here!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Paul and Annie got behind the rest, convulsed with shamed laughter.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How much will it be to drive to Brook Cottage?&rdquo; said Mrs. Morel.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Two shillings.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, how far is it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A good way.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t believe it,&rdquo; she said.
    </p>
    <p>
      But she scrambled in. There were eight crowded in one old seaside
      carriage.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You see,&rdquo; said Mrs. Morel, &ldquo;it&rsquo;s only threepence each, and if it were a
      tramcar&mdash;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They drove along. Each cottage they came to, Mrs. Morel cried:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is it this? Now, this is it!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Everybody sat breathless. They drove past. There was a universal sigh.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;m thankful it wasn&rsquo;t that brute,&rdquo; said Mrs. Morel. &ldquo;I WAS frightened.&rdquo;
       They drove on and on.
    </p>
    <p>
      At last they descended at a house that stood alone over the dyke by the
      highroad. There was wild excitement because they had to cross a little
      bridge to get into the front garden. But they loved the house that lay so
      solitary, with a sea-meadow on one side, and immense expanse of land
      patched in white barley, yellow oats, red wheat, and green root-crops,
      flat and stretching level to the sky.
    </p>
    <p>
      Paul kept accounts. He and his mother ran the show. The total expenses&mdash;lodging,
      food, everything&mdash;was sixteen shillings a week per person. He and
      Leonard went bathing in the mornings. Morel was wandering abroad quite
      early.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You, Paul,&rdquo; his mother called from the bedroom, &ldquo;eat a piece of
      bread-and-butter.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;All right,&rdquo; he answered.
    </p>
    <p>
      And when he got back he saw his mother presiding in state at the
      breakfast-table. The woman of the house was young. Her husband was blind,
      and she did laundry work. So Mrs. Morel always washed the pots in the
      kitchen and made the beds.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But you said you&rsquo;d have a real holiday,&rdquo; said Paul, &ldquo;and now you work.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Work!&rdquo; she exclaimed. &ldquo;What are you talking about!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He loved to go with her across the fields to the village and the sea. She
      was afraid of the plank bridge, and he abused her for being a baby. On the
      whole he stuck to her as if he were HER man.
    </p>
    <p>
      Miriam did not get much of him, except, perhaps, when all the others went
      to the &ldquo;Coons&rdquo;. Coons were insufferably stupid to Miriam, so he thought
      they were to himself also, and he preached priggishly to Annie about the
      fatuity of listening to them. Yet he, too, knew all their songs, and sang
      them along the roads roisterously. And if he found himself listening, the
      stupidity pleased him very much. Yet to Annie he said:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Such rot! there isn&rsquo;t a grain of intelligence in it. Nobody with more
      gumption than a grasshopper could go and sit and listen.&rdquo; And to Miriam he
      said, with much scorn of Annie and the others: &ldquo;I suppose they&rsquo;re at the
      &lsquo;Coons&rsquo;.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It was queer to see Miriam singing coon songs. She had a straight chin
      that went in a perpendicular line from the lower lip to the turn. She
      always reminded Paul of some sad Botticelli angel when she sang, even when
      it was:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
     &ldquo;Come down lover&rsquo;s lane
     For a walk with me, talk with me.&rdquo;
 </pre>
    <p>
      Only when he sketched, or at evening when the others were at the &ldquo;Coons&rdquo;,
      she had him to herself. He talked to her endlessly about his love of
      horizontals: how they, the great levels of sky and land in Lincolnshire,
      meant to him the eternality of the will, just as the bowed Norman arches
      of the church, repeating themselves, meant the dogged leaping forward of
      the persistent human soul, on and on, nobody knows where; in contradiction
      to the perpendicular lines and to the Gothic arch, which, he said, leapt
      up at heaven and touched the ecstasy and lost itself in the divine.
      Himself, he said, was Norman, Miriam was Gothic. She bowed in consent even
      to that.
    </p>
    <p>
      One evening he and she went up the great sweeping shore of sand towards
      Theddlethorpe. The long breakers plunged and ran in a hiss of foam along
      the coast. It was a warm evening. There was not a figure but themselves on
      the far reaches of sand, no noise but the sound of the sea. Paul loved to
      see it clanging at the land. He loved to feel himself between the noise of
      it and the silence of the sandy shore. Miriam was with him. Everything
      grew very intense. It was quite dark when they turned again. The way home
      was through a gap in the sandhills, and then along a raised grass road
      between two dykes. The country was black and still. From behind the
      sandhills came the whisper of the sea. Paul and Miriam walked in silence.
      Suddenly he started. The whole of his blood seemed to burst into flame,
      and he could scarcely breathe. An enormous orange moon was staring at them
      from the rim of the sandhills. He stood still, looking at it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah!&rdquo; cried Miriam, when she saw it.
    </p>
    <p>
      He remained perfectly still, staring at the immense and ruddy moon, the
      only thing in the far-reaching darkness of the level. His heart beat
      heavily, the muscles of his arms contracted.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is it?&rdquo; murmured Miriam, waiting for him.
    </p>
    <p>
      He turned and looked at her. She stood beside him, for ever in shadow. Her
      face, covered with the darkness of her hat, was watching him unseen. But
      she was brooding. She was slightly afraid&mdash;deeply moved and
      religious. That was her best state. He was impotent against it. His blood
      was concentrated like a flame in his chest. But he could not get across to
      her. There were flashes in his blood. But somehow she ignored them. She
      was expecting some religious state in him. Still yearning, she was half
      aware of his passion, and gazed at him, troubled.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is it?&rdquo; she murmured again.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It&rsquo;s the moon,&rdquo; he answered, frowning.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; she assented. &ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t it wonderful?&rdquo; She was curious about him. The
      crisis was past.
    </p>
    <p>
      He did not know himself what was the matter. He was naturally so young,
      and their intimacy was so abstract, he did not know he wanted to crush her
      on to his breast to ease the ache there. He was afraid of her. The fact
      that he might want her as a man wants a woman had in him been suppressed
      into a shame. When she shrank in her convulsed, coiled torture from the
      thought of such a thing, he had winced to the depths of his soul. And now
      this &ldquo;purity&rdquo; prevented even their first love-kiss. It was as if she could
      scarcely stand the shock of physical love, even a passionate kiss, and
      then he was too shrinking and sensitive to give it.
    </p>
    <p>
      As they walked along the dark fen-meadow he watched the moon and did not
      speak. She plodded beside him. He hated her, for she seemed in some way to
      make him despise himself. Looking ahead&mdash;he saw the one light in the
      darkness, the window of their lamp-lit cottage.
    </p>
    <p>
      He loved to think of his mother, and the other jolly people.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, everybody else has been in long ago!&rdquo; said his mother as they
      entered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What does that matter!&rdquo; he cried irritably. &ldquo;I can go a walk if I like,
      can&rsquo;t I?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And I should have thought you could get in to supper with the rest,&rdquo; said
      Mrs. Morel.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I shall please myself,&rdquo; he retorted. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not LATE. I shall do as I
      like.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well,&rdquo; said his mother cuttingly, &ldquo;then DO as you like.&rdquo; And she
      took no further notice of him that evening. Which he pretended neither to
      notice nor to care about, but sat reading. Miriam read also, obliterating
      herself. Mrs. Morel hated her for making her son like this. She watched
      Paul growing irritable, priggish, and melancholic. For this she put the
      blame on Miriam. Annie and all her friends joined against the girl. Miriam
      had no friend of her own, only Paul. But she did not suffer so much,
      because she despised the triviality of these other people.
    </p>
    <p>
      And Paul hated her because, somehow, she spoilt his ease and naturalness.
      And he writhed himself with a feeling of humiliation.
    </p>


</section></body></html>
